The current state of multimodal AI
models have a Frankenstein problem. Take
any popular models like Claude, Grock,
or Llama. They can all write text,
analyze images, and even generate them
in some cases. But here's the thing.
Most of them are not truly multimodal.
Well, maybe except for Gemini and GPT40,
but who really knows? The researchers
instead commonly use techniques which
are generally referred to as late fusion
to make these multimodal models. This
approach treats each modality separately
in the initial model training stage. So
there is a dedicated vision component to
process images and a large language
model component to handle text. These
separate components would then be
connected later down the line, typically
by feeding visual features into the LLM
at a later stage during training. The
reason why this approach has been pretty
popular is because it lets researchers
utilize the pre-trained components that
have already been optimized for their
specific modalities. These components
are also really easy to train since
there are already a handful of
pre-existing data sets or data pipelines
built for them. So the real hurdle will
only be you Frankensteining these
state-of-the-art components together
into something multimodal. However, it
doesn't change the fact that the model
would still be lacking a genuine
semantic understanding between the two
dominant modality that is text and
visual concepts. So, Metafare, which is
Meta's research group known for
proposing a lot of new cool AI
techniques, is ahead of the game as
usual, publishing a paper called
Chameleon a year ago, showing
empirically how well their early fusion
models can scale up to 34 billion
parameters. And fast forward to 2 months
ago, a new paper published by Apple,
yes, Apple, they have been really active
in multimodal research recently shows a
promising scaling law for models that
are trained with early fusion compared
to late fusion. And before we dive into
why early fusion might just be the next
paradigm for multimodal models with a
constant headache of managing countless
unique passwords on top of a threat of
data breach looming, we already know
that using a secure and trustworthy
password manager is essential for
protecting our digital lives. That's why
I'd like to share with you about Proton
Pass, which is from the privacy focused
team at Proton, born in Switzerland.
Personally, I have already been using
Proton because of how easy it is to set
up their services that have top tier
security. And Proton Pass is more than a
robust password manager. It not only can
store your passwords, it can also act as
your secure vault for notes, credit
cards, and even your personal
information that you can now autofill
when you buy stuff online, so you can
forget retyping your address for the
hundth time without having it stored
plainly in your browser. Proton Pass
also offers secure login effortlessly
with strong password generation,
autofill and cross device sync while
protecting against fishing. And it can
enhance your online privacy using
integrated hi my mail aliases to shield
your real email address during signups
and leverage cutting edge security like
pass key support and integrated 2FA
authenticator, dark web monitoring, and
the AI powered Proton Sentinel for
advanced threat detection. What's
amazing is that Proton Pass is 100%
community funded. This means no VC are
involved, ensuring the company remains
user focused and privacy first. And the
best part is you can start securing your
Proton Pass right now with both free and
affordable premium options available. So
if you're ready to take control of your
passwords and online privacy the easy
way, check out Proton Pass using the
link down in the description and thank
you Proton Pass for sponsoring this
video. Anyways, the optimal way to build
AI that can understand multiple types of
information should be able to learn them
end to end. So instead of treating
modalities separately, early fusion
means a model will be able to process
raw text and visual data together from
the very beginning using an unified
transformer architecture. This is more
like having a single person who can
naturally understand both language and
vision simultaneously rather than
requiring translation between
specialists. And this is the key method
of meta's chameleon. In the paper, the
researchers treat everything including
images as discrete tokens that could be
processed by the same transformer
architecture. So just like words, images
were tokenized into discrete tokens with
an image tokenizer. This then allows a
base model, which in this case they used
Llama 2, to seamlessly generate
sequences mixing text and images. And
given how straightforward that solution
sounded, of course, Chameleon's training
wouldn't be as smoothing as that. So
when the researchers first scaled up to
8 billion parameters and 1 trillion
tokens, training became really unstable
for some reason with divergences
appearing late in the process. And it
turns out this is caused by the model
sharing all the modalities in the same
way where each modality signals will
compete with each other. So in cases
where image generation is a function in
the model since it requires more extreme
activation values to represent the rich
visual information this causes the
signal to compete with each other and
becomes destructive making everything
else unusable. And without getting too
technical, they basically solve this by
normalizing the signals at key points in
the model, which prevents different
modalities from competing their signals.
And the resulting early fusion model
goes a long way. Chameleon could do
things that late Fusion models simply
couldn't. It can generate documents with
images and text interled in natural
sequences, create images in the middle
of text explanations, and reason across
modalities without the artificial
barriers imposed by separate encoders.
Benchmark-wise, it outperforms its Llama
2 baseline on the language capabilities.
On imageto text benchmarks, it
outperforms Flamingo, GP4V, and Gemini
Pro, which are the top dogs at the time.
But even with the convincing performance
early Fusion has, the success of late
Fusion methods, the cheap cost, and the
convenience of building on existing
pre-trained components has still made
big AI labs flock to those methods
primarily. Not until the research paper
proposed a few weeks ago called scaling
loss for native multimodal models
proving that early fusion is the way to
go and might just convince the field to
jump to this early fusion paradigm for
multimodal models. And when I say
convincing, it is a research conducted
on 457 different models ranging from 300
million to 4 billion parameters. So that
amount of experiment definitely speaks
for itself. In the research, they
systematically compared early and late
fusion and validated the chameleon's
approach showing that early fusion
models match late fusion performance
across the board. So the assumption that
we had where specialized pre-trained
components would outperform unified
training have actually been wrong the
whole time. Another surprising discovery
is that early fusion models were
actually more efficient which is
completely opposite to the consensus.
They trained faster, used less memory,
required fewer parameters, and were
easier to deploy. All the complexity of
orchestrating multiple specialists just
has too much overhead that makes early
fusion a way better method than late
fusion. What's even better is that
multimodal models followed scaling laws
nearly identical to textonly language
models. On top of that, when applying
mixture of experts in these multimodal
models, something fascinating happens.
When they train models without telling
them anything about the difference
between text and images, the model would
still spontaneously learn to specialize.
Some experts became text specialist,
other became image specialists. And
these specialization emerged naturally
through training with no human guidance.
It might be because the difference
between the signals for text and images
are pretty different, making the
organization of knowledge easier. But
this kind of show that early fusion and
mixture of experts are a match made in
AI heaven. Given that has pretty much
become essential for modern LLM due to
its guaranteed efficiency gains, it was
a great though perhaps inevitable
surprise that works exceptionally well
with early fusion, providing significant
performance boosts while maintaining the
same inference cost. Another
counterintuitive finding was that as
image resolution increased, the early
fusion models actually performed better
relative to late fusion, not worse. This
completely flips the intuition that
specialized vision encoders would excel
at high resolution image processing.
Instead, a unified processing of visual
information proved more effective than
specialized components. On the other
hand, high resolution images would
result in a lot more token use. So
extending the context window is a pretty
important goal. But this unified model
is not completely omnipotent either.
While early fusion models are better at
heavy text documents mixed with images,
late fusion models are still better at
tasks that require training on pure
image caption pairs. So the optimal
architecture should still be chosen
based on the specific use case and
available data rather than believing
that early fusion is oneizefits-all.
However, early Fusion's ability to learn
joint representations from the ground up
consistently outperforms the
compositional approach of late Fusion
while requiring fewer computational
resources and have less architectural
complexity. So going forward, we might
actually see an open- source paradigm
shift towards native multimodal LMS with
late fusion probably becomes an edged
use case where reusing pre-trained
components is required. I also
personally feel like a unified
multimodal model makes the most sense
because of how much knowledge images can
help unlock knowledge. This is also
shown in recent vision language model
research where they were able to show
that scaling to 100 billion pre-training
images improved cultural and linguistic
inclusiveness of models. The only
potential complaint I would think of of
this unified architecture is the use of
image tokenizer because images are
continuous data and tokenizing them just
doesn't sit right to me. So maybe in a
future video I'll explore how multimodal
diffusion LM might solve this problem.
Anyways, as usual, of course, Metaphair
is yet again one year ahead of the game.
The development of GPD40 and Gemini
might have also pivoted into a unified
architecture early on, and now it feels
like every other companies and open
source are lagging behind. Anyways, if
you like today's collection of papers, I
think you would also enjoy my newsletter
where I cover the latest and the
juiciest research papers weekly. on
there. I cover new and fascinating AI
research papers that I might not have
time to make into videos. So if that's
your cup of tea, definitely go check it
out. And thank you guys for watching. A
big shout out to Andrew Chellas, Chris
Leoo, Degan News Research, Kanan, Robert
Zaviasa, Leis Muk, Ben Shainer, Marcelo,
Ferraria, Zane, Sheep, Poof, and Enu, DX
Research Group, and many others that
support me through Patreon or YouTube.
Follow me on Twitter if you haven't.
[Music]